FRW-1427 How to delete store (#1574)
spryker/spryker-docs: docs/scos/dev/tutorials-and-howtos/howtos/howto-delete-store-with-ds.md

description: This document shows how to delete store when the system is running with a dynamic store feature.
past_updated: Jun 26, 2023
template: howto-guide-template
---

This document describes the steps to consider how manually delete store in spryker when using dynamic store.

## When it might be useful

Often, the store that was created earlier becomes unnecessary. It can be a store that has been used for a brand, product, holiday, or marketing promotions or events аnd ending experiments with no production environment. 

On the technical side, removing such a store helps:
1. Increasing the speed of the store and deleting redundant data.
2. Reduction of memory and storage footprint.

## Step-by-step plan

**To check all your actions, it is better to perform all actions in a test environment. And also provide a backup of the database and other storages if necessary.**

### 1. Backup Database.

Before starting the process, you need to back up the database and check the possibility of recovery from it.
If you are using AWS RDS, follow by link [Create and restore database backups](/docs/cloud/dev/spryker-cloud-commerce-os/create-and-restore-database-backups.html). 

> ### 2. Suspend P&S.

Reviewer: We need to enable maintenance mode also. Please add it to the documentation.

In order to reduce the risks of data synchronization errors, you can suspend data synchronization through P&S.
Make sure there are not too many messages in the RabbitMQ.
Then suspend `queue:worker:start` command.
If you use Jenkins to run, you can stop the following commands by disabling the project. `XXX__queue-worker-start`.  `XXX`  - is the store name.

### 3. Database. 

#### 3.1 Cleaning data in related database tables. 

> The number of tables that use relation with the `spy_store` table may depend on the use of the functionality and depends on the installed modules.

Reviewer: Please highlight that we need to remove data from `spy_store`

The list of available tables that may contain a foreign key relationship:
- `spy_price_product_store`
- `spy_asset_store`
- `spy_availability_abstract`
- `spy_availability`
- `spy_availability_notification_subscription`
- `spy_category_store`
- `spy_cms_page_store`
- `spy_company_store`
- `spy_discount`
- `spy_discount_store`
- `spy_merchant_store`
- `spy_merchant_relationship_sales_order_threshold`
- `spy_oms_product_reservation`
- `spy_oms_product_offer_reservation`
- `spy_payment_method_store`
- `spy_price_product_schedule`
- `spy_product_abstract_store`
- `spy_product_label_store`
- `spy_product_measurement_sales_unit_store`
- `spy_product_offer_store`
- `spy_product_option_value_price`
- `spy_product_relation_store`
- `spy_quote`
- `spy_sales_order_threshold`
- `spy_shipment_method_price`
- `spy_shipment_method_store`
- `spy_stock_store`
- `spy_touch_search`
- `spy_touch_storage`

> ### 3.2 Deleting relations in configuration tables

Reviewer: Can be combined in the first paragraph `Cleaning data in related database tables.` because it is actually the same, as other tables that have a relation to store.

Store has new configuration tables that were used for dynamic store:
- `spy_locale_store`
- `spy_currency_store`
- `spy_country_store`

Please delete all records related to the store.

### 3.3 Clearing data in other project tables.

> Also, you may have other related tables used in the project, don't forget to check them and delete data from them.

Reviewer: Please fit this one into `#### 3.1 Cleaning data in related database tables.` part, because we do not know which tables exactly we need to delete.

---

> title: "HowTo: Delete store when using the dynamic store feature"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "How To: Delete store when using the dynamic store feature"
```

> description: This document shows how to delete store when the system is running with a dynamic store feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: This document shows how to delete a store when the system is running with a dynamic store feature.
```

past_updated: Jun 26, 2023
template: howto-guide-template
---

> This document describes the steps to consider how manually delete store in spryker when using dynamic store.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document describes the steps to take to delete a store in Spryker when using dynamic store.
```

## When it might be useful

> Often, the store that was created earlier becomes unnecessary. It can be a store that has been used for a brand, product, holiday, or marketing promotions or events аnd ending experiments with no production environment. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Occasionally, a store that was created earlier becomes unnecessary. It can be a store that has been used for a brand, product, holiday, marketing promotions, or events аnd ending experiments with no production environment. 
```

Reviewer 2: editor's note:
what does ending experiments with no production environment.  mean exactly in this context? please explain.

> On the technical side, removing such a store helps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On the technical side, removing a store helps with:
```

> 1. Increasing the speed of the store and deleting redundant data.

Reviewer 2: Editor's note: how does deleting a store help with increasing its speed?

Author: Data of stores take up a lot of space on the server. Deleting a store frees up space on the server reducing the load on the server for indexing and search in database. Same for search service (Elasticsearch) and storage service (Redis).

> 2. Reduction of memory and storage footprint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Reducing wasted memory and your storage footprint.
```

## Step-by-step plan

> **To check all your actions, it is better to perform all actions in a test environment. And also provide a backup of the database and other storages if necessary.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**For the sake of security, it is better to perform these steps in a test environment. Remember to also provide a backup of the database and other storages, if necessary.**
```

### 1. Backup Database.

> Before starting the process, you need to back up the database and check the possibility of recovery from it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before starting the process of removing a store, you need to back the store's database up and ensure it is recoverable.
```

> If you are using AWS RDS, follow by link [Create and restore database backups](/docs/cloud/dev/spryker-cloud-commerce-os/create-and-restore-database-backups.html). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are using AWS RDS, check [Create and restore database backups](/docs/cloud/dev/spryker-cloud-commerce-os/create-and-restore-database-backups.html) for more information. 
```
Expand RDS acronym to full words, please.

### 2. Suspend P&S.

> **In order to reduce the risks of data synchronization errors, you can suspend data synchronization through P&S.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**In order to reduce the riskof data synchronization errors, you can suspend data synchronization through P&S.**
```
Expand P&S to full words.

1. Enable **maintenance mode** by using command: 
```bash
vendor/bin/console maintenance mode
```

> Or if you are using AWS infrastructure please check documentation [Enable and disable maintenance mode](docs/cloud/dev/spryker-cloud-commerce-os/manage-maintenance-mode/enable-and-disable-maintenance-mode.html)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are using AWS infrastructure check its relevant documentation [Enable and disable maintenance mode](docs/cloud/dev/spryker-cloud-commerce-os/manage-maintenance-mode/enable-and-disable-maintenance-mode.html).
```

> 2. Make sure there are not too many messages in the RabbitMQ. Wait for the messages to be processed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Make sure there aren't too many many messages showing in the RabbitMQ. Wait for the messages to be processed.
```
Editor's note: might be useful to explain what will /would happen if too many msgs are showing up.

> 3. Suspend P&S and cronjob scheduler use command: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. To suspend P&S and the Cronjob scheduler use this command: 
```

```bash
vendor/bin/console scheduler:suspend
```

### 3. Database. Cleaning data and configration in related database tables.

> The number of tables that use relation with the `spy_store` table may depend on the use of the functionality and depends on the installed modules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The number of tables that use relation with the `spy_store` table may depend on the use of the functionality and depends on the installed modules.
```
What does use relation mean in this context?

The list of available tables with data that may contain a foreign key relationship:
- `spy_price_product_store`
- `spy_asset_store`
- `spy_availability_abstract`
- `spy_availability`
- `spy_availability_notification_subscription`
- `spy_category_store`
- `spy_cms_page_store`
- `spy_company_store`
- `spy_discount`
- `spy_discount_store`
- `spy_merchant_store`
- `spy_merchant_relationship_sales_order_threshold`
- `spy_oms_product_reservation`
- `spy_oms_product_offer_reservation`
- `spy_payment_method_store`
- `spy_price_product_schedule`
- `spy_product_abstract_store`
- `spy_product_label_store`
- `spy_product_measurement_sales_unit_store`
- `spy_product_offer_store`
- `spy_product_option_value_price`
- `spy_product_relation_store`
- `spy_quote`
- `spy_sales_order_threshold`
- `spy_shipment_method_price`
- `spy_shipment_method_store`
- `spy_stock_store`
- `spy_touch_search`
- `spy_touch_storage`

Store has new configuration tables that were used for dynamic store:
- `spy_locale_store`
- `spy_currency_store`
- `spy_country_store`

> Please delete all records related to the store. Also, you may have other related tables used in the project, don't forget to check them and delete data from them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Make sure to delete all records related to the store. You may also have other related tables used in the project, make sure to check them and delete data from them.
```

> After removing all related data from all tables, you can remove the row with **store** data from the table `spy_store`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After removing all related data from all tables, you can remove the row with the **store** data from the table `spy_store`. 
```

 
### 4. Cleaning data in the key-value storage engine.

> Data is stored with keys that contain the name store. If you use Redis as a key-value store.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Data is stored with keys that contain the name store, if you use Redis as a key-value store.
```

The key name follows this format: `kv:{store}:{locale}:{resource-type}:{key}`.

> `XXX` - name of the store will be used as an example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider `XXX` as the name of the store to be used as an example.
```

- Stock information: 
   - `kv:availability:xxx:*`
- Product details: 
    - `kv:price_product_abstract:xxx:*`
    - `kv:price_product_abstract_merchant_relationship:xxx:*`
    - `kv:price_product_concrete:xxx:*`
    - `kv:price_product_concrete_merchant_relationship:xxx:*`
    - `kv:product_abstract:xxx:*`
    - `kv:product_abstract_category:xxx:*`
    - `kv:product_abstract_option:xxx:*`
    - `kv:product_abstract_relation:xxx:*`
    - `kv:product_concrete_measurement_unit:xxx:*`
    - `kv:product_concrete_product_offer_price:xxx:*`
    - `kv:product_concrete_product_offers:xxx:*`
    - `kv:product_label_dictionary:xxx:*`
    - `kv:product_offer:xxx:*`
    - `kv:product_offer_availability:xxx:*`
- Product category details:
    - `kv:category_node:xxx:*`
    - `kv:category_tree:at:*`
- CMS pages and blocks: 
    - `kv:cms_block:xxx:*`
    - `kv:cms_page:xxx:*`
- Merchant: 
    - `kv:merchant:xxx:*`
    - `kv:price_product_abstract_merchant_relationship:xxx:*`
- Adjust `kv:store_list:` and delete store name XXX values in stores. 
```json
{"stores":["AT","DE","XXX"],"_timestamp":111111111111}
``` 
- Delete key `kv:store:xxx` with value about store. 

> Note: Project custom data stored keyes  may also be present. Please check it in detail.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note: A project's custom data stored keys may also be present.
```

### 5. Remove data from Search engine

> If you using Elasticsearch, each configured store has its index, which is installed automatically. An index name consists of the following parts:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are using Elasticsearch, each configured store has its index, which is installed automatically. An indexed name consists of the following parts:
```

- An optional prefix, which is defined by the SearchElasticsearchConstants::INDEX_PREFIX configuration option (for example, we use by default `spryker`).
- A store name.
- A configuration file name.

> Index name components are delimited with an underscore—for example:  `spryker_xxx_page`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Index name components are delimited with an underscore, for example:  `spryker_xxx_page`.
```

The following indexes are available in the standard configuration (example: `xxx` -  store name): 

- `spryker_xxx_merchant`.
- `spryker_xxx_page`.
- `spryker_xxx_product-review`.
- `spryker_xxx_return_reason`.

### 6. Resume P&S

> Follow these steps to restore normal operation:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Follow these steps to resume normal operations:
```

> 1. Restart the cronjob scheduler. Through command execution. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Restart the Cronjob scheduler through these commands: 
```

Run:  
```bash
vendor/bin/console scheduler:resume
``` 

> 2. Also disable maintenance mode by running the command 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Disable maintenance mode by running the following command:
```

Run: 
```bash
vendor/bin/console maintenance:disable
``` 

> ## Checklists 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Checklist
```

> 1. Make sure the deleted store is not available in the admin panel in the list

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Make sure the deleted store is not available in the admin panel in the list.
```
